---
layout: post
title: On the proposal for Data Classes
excerpt: The proposed "data class" semantics for Java will just promote bad design!
author: George Aristy
date: '2017-11-05T11:40:00.000-04:00'
categories:
  - programming
  - java
tags:
- software-development
- design-patterns
- antipattern
- dto
- java
comments: true
---

There is a new draft proposal for Java 'Data Classes' being worked on in project *amber* - read about it [here](http://cr.openjdk.java.net/~briangoetz/amber/datum.html). In short I think the main points are:

* **Design intent**: clearly and unequivocally express the design intent of a class as a 'DTO' (even though the author never mentions *DTO*)
* **Boilerplate**: let the compiler take care of proper implementations of typical DTO operations like `equals()` and `hashCode()`
* **Switch statements**: the author briefly talks about enabling semantic features around these DTOs, eg. the ability to use them as targets for `switch` statements

The draft also goes into some specifics like accessors not necessarily following JavaBeans conventions, opt-in mutability, and migration/compatibility concerns, among others.

Let me tell you why I think this proposal **is a bad idea**.

**Design intent**:

This is an honorable goal: it will immediately be obvious to a reader what the design intent of a *data class* is. The reader wouldn't have to wade through countless lines following the typical getters and setters, `equals`, `hashCode`, and `toString` implementations just to be sure that this class is just a *data class*. Fine.

To see the problem with this line of thinking you must first step back and ask yourself: how many DTO-types have I defined in my project and will this new language construct simplify my code considerably? If your answer is "*a lot*" to both questions, you have a *deeper* problem that this new construct cannot solve: ***you may not be thinking in an object-oriented way***. Many of the types you've defined are merely *bags of data* and you are most likely programming in an *imperative* style, not object-oriented as you *should* be with Java. **That is the crux of my argument.**

Let's kill the obvious retort right away: *DTO IS an antipattern but pure OOP is not practical therefore there's no point in judging and getting upset about it*.

Yes, DTO is unavoidable sometimes, especially when interfacing with remote APIs (eg. JAX-WS). However, a couple of points:

1. These should exist at the *periphery* of your code
2. They should be encapsulated by your domain model, where operations like `equals()` and `hashCode()` truly matter

In essence, you must avoid [anemic domain models](https://www.martinfowler.com/bliki/AnemicDomainModel.html). DTOs, if present, should only exist at the *fringes* of your project, and *not* form the backbone of your whole design philosophy. They should *ideally* only be present when auto-generated by framework/tools like `wsimport` and you should never have to touch them.

**Boilerplate**:

If you accept the previous argument, then the getter/setter "boilerplate" becomes a *non-issue*: tools will automatically create them *only where you absolutely need them*. In regards to the proposal, that leaves us with just the other `Object` methods of interest: `equals()` and `hashCode()`. Here's what I think:

They should be taken out of `Object` and [made into their own interfaces](/posts/java-s-equals-hashcode-should-not-have-been-declared-in-object).

Not all APIs want or even need all their DTOs to implement `equals()`, much less `hashCode()`.

**Switch statements**:

This is cool but, why not switch on any object using `Object#equals` (or on my proposed `Equality` interface)? Because of performance reasons? They already reached a compromise on switching on strings. And as an SO user so eloquently put it ([source](https://stackoverflow.com/a/31671438/1623885)): 

    ...technical obstacles shouldn’t drive language design. If there is no way to compile it to efficient 
    code, it might still get compiled to the equivalent of if … else … clauses, and still have a win on 
    source code brevity.

### The bottom line

By promoting DTOs to *first-class citizenship*, novice programmers who don't know better will feel emboldened to keep abusing the DTO pattern. The other interest group - the implementators of "interface APIs" like Hibernate or jax-ws-ri - will gain some marginal benefit by having their templates reduced by a few lines. 

**This proposal will overall promote bad design with only marginal benefits.**

Why not focus on other, *good* patterns?
